Write docs for new UUID type (#1512)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/functions/uuid.adoc

:description: UUID functions allow you to create UUID values and check their most/least significant bits
:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-neo4j-2026.08 cypher-25-only
= UUID functions

> UUID functions allow you to construct xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc[`UUID` values], and fetch the most/least significant bits of a UUID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UUID functions allow you to construct xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc[`UUID` values], and fetch their most/least significant bits.
```

[[functions-uuid]]
== uuid()

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `uuid()`

> | *Description* 3+| Returns a randomly generate `UUID`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Description* 3+| Returns a randomly generated `UUID`.
```

.1+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| *Returns* 3+| xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc[`UUID`]
|===

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `uuid(name :: STRING)`

> | *Description* 3+| Converts the given `STRING` to a `UUID`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Description* 3+| Converts a `STRING` value to a `UUID`.
```

.2+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*

> | `name` | `STRING` | The `STRING` to convert to a `UUID`, this should be 32 hexadecimal digits displayed in 5 groups, separated by 4 hyphens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `name` | `STRING` | The `STRING` must be 32 hexadecimal digits displayed in 5 groups, separated by 4 hyphens.
```

| *Returns* 3+| xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc[`UUID`]
|===

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `uuid(mostSigBits :: INTEGER, leastSigBits :: INTEGER)`

> | *Description* 3+| Converts the given `INTEGER` values to a `UUID`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Description* 3+| Converts an `INTEGER` value to a `UUID`.
```

Author: It needs 2 integer values though, your change implies one to me; perhaps: Converts two `INTEGER` values to a `UUID`?

Reviewer: Yes, that is much better 😄

.3+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `mostSigBits` | `INTEGER` | The most significant bits.
| `leastSigBits` | `INTEGER` | The least significant bits.
| *Returns* 3+| xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc[`UUID`]
|===

.Considerations
|===

> | The randomly generated `UUID` value not intended for cryptographic use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The randomly generated `UUID` value is not intended for cryptographic use.
```

| `UUID` values can be xref:values-and-types/uuid.adoc#store-uuid-properties[stored as properties].

> | If a `STRING` is used in `name`, it must be 32 hexadecimal digits displayed in 5 groups, separated by 4 hyphens.

Reviewer: Already in argument description?
```suggestion
```

> | A `null` `name`, `mostSigBits` or `leastSigBits` will return `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A `null` `name`, `mostSigBits`, or `leastSigBits` value will return `null`.
```

|===

> .Construct a `UUID` value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Construct a random `UUID` value
```

====

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN uuid() AS randomUUID
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| randomUUID

| UUID("550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000")

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

====

> .Construct a `UUID` value with a `STRING` value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Convert a `STRING` value to a `UUID`
```

====

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN uuid("550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000") AS uuid
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| uuid

| uuid("550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000")

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

====

> .Construct a `UUID` value with two `INTEGER` values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Convert two `INTEGER` values to a `UUID` 
```

====

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN uuid(42, 42) AS uuid
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| uuid

| uuid("00000000-0000-002a-0000-00000000002a")

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

====

.`null` values
====

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN uuid(null) AS nullUUIDValue,
       uuid(42, null) AS nullMostSigBits,
       uuid(null, 42) AS nullLeastSigBits,
       uuid(null, null) AS nullMostLeastSigBits
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="4*<m"]
|===
| nullUUIDValue | nullMostSigBits | nullLeastSigBits | nullMostLeastSigBits

| null | null | null | null

4+d|Rows: 1
|===

====

> [[functions-uuid-leastsignificantbits]]

Reviewer: Should we have examples for this and the following function?

Author: Yeah, I can add some :)

== uuid.leastSignificantBits()

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `uuid.leastSignificantBits(uuid)`
| *Description* 3+| Returns the least significant bits from the given `UUID`.
.2+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `uuid` | `UUID` | The `UUID` to return the least significant bits from.
| *Returns* 3+| `INTEGER`
|===

.Considerations
|===

> | `uuid.leastSignificantBits(null)` returns `null`.

Reviewer: Maybe? (And if, so, the equivalent for mostSignificant)

```suggestion
| `uuid.leastSignificantBits(null)` returns `null`.
| The least significant bits represents the lower 64 bits of a `UUID` value (the least significant half).
```
